August 22nd, if it don't rain anymore. Right. And
it's about four to two in the afternoon, and we're
talking with William H. Cook. C-double-O-K-E.
Right. Okay, and you became editor and publisher
of the Rockdale Reporter in 1936, didn't you?
Right, yeah. And you were born in what year? 1907.
Here in Rockville? No, I was born in Clarendon, up
in the Panhandle. In Clarendon? I didn't see them
in town. I left there at a very early age,
apparently. My father was So about how old were you
when you came
to Rockdale? So I came, when we came to Rockdale in
1912, I would have been five years old. I'm not
exactly sure how long we lived in Clarendon after I
was born. It was apparently not very long. And then
we moved to Brady and lived there. And left there in
1912 to come to Rockdale. So you were five years
old? I was about five, yeah. Do you remember the
mine disaster? I guess you were about six years
old. Well, you know, I remember it the way a child or
a kid remembers things. in his older age. I heard a
man say once that the older I get, the more I can
remember about my boyhood, but I can't remember
what happened the day before yesterday. And I
haven't quite reached that stage yet. Because
there's a whole lot of things that I can remember
vaguely about my boyhood. And I do remember the
mines. Did your dad talk about the mines very much?
There was not a great deal of talk about the mines.
You know, they were just there, and it was kind of, I
mean, everybody's used to them being there.
They've been there for a long time. They seem to
have been a peripheral sort of thing to Rocky.
Yeah, right. Would you agree with that? Right,
they were. And they were way out there, four or five
miles or more from town.
I remember more about those old mines from later
years after I was in high school and out of high
school when we used to go dove hunting, quail
hunting, and walk across there. That was after the
mines were gone. And those old sinkholes and
things, you know, we could see evidences of the
mines. I remember that really more than I remember
the mines. I remember that last week myself,
haven't you? Well, that's very important, some
important information that we need, because what
years would your high school years have covered in
post-high school years, exactly? Yeah, well, let
me see, I must have graduated, I was such a smart
little devil. I graduated when I was 16. I believe
that's right. I graduated in 1922.
Okay, and were the mines shut down by that time, or
most of them? Oh, yeah. Yeah, they were shut down by
then. Just when I was a kid, the mines were out
there. But by 1920s, they weren't operating. Now,
there was the Johnny Boniva mine operated a good
while out there after all the rest of them had shut
down. That and the strip mining. And the strip
mining came in, uh-huh. Johnny Boniva, that
Johnny Boniva mine. I don't know whether Johnny
bought that or fell heir to it or what, but I knew him
real well. Well, why don't you tell me something
about him? And he made a pot full of money out of that
mine. It was kind of a one-man operation. I mean, he
ran it, and it was his mine. And he was a young fellow
around here, and... That mine, I don't remember
now, it either sold, either sold it or closed it. I
probably closed it because the demand for lignite
coal after the arrival of natural gas became so, so
low that, you know, it wasn't, there just wasn't a
market for it anymore. Well, according to the
newspaper, it changed hands around 1930 or 31, but
John Boniva maintain its superintendent status.
And what I haven't been able to find yet is when it
actually shut down. Yeah, well, no, I wouldn't be
able to tell you that either. Well, did you ever
make any trips to the mine? Not really, not really.
The only trips I ever made to the mine area was when I
was just a small kid riding a donkey. And as I told
you once before, A lot of us boys on Saturday
afternoons and Sundays, we'd get a few nickels and
we'd get on our donkeys and ride out there to the
commissary. It seemed like that soda pop and
nickel candy out there tasted a whole lot better
than what you bought in town. Probably a long
donkey ride out there. Yeah, but if somebody
invited any of us to go down in one of those shafts,
We'd have probably been scared to death. We'd have
run from pride. I don't think I would have gone down
in one of them. I'm not so sure I'd like to go down in
one now. Myself, I feel the same way. I'm sort of
glad they're all closed up. But when you did go out
there, if you could possibly remember, did you go
through the mining camps where the Mexicans
lived, or did you skirt around them? No, we never
did really visit in them. Those mining camps, it
was just row after row of houses, little wooden
shacks that they lived in. They all looked just
alike. But no, I don't ever remember. They were off
to the right of the dirt highway that we traveled
out there at that time, south of the railroad
track. And I can remember seeing them over there,
but I don't know that I ever went over and around
those towns. We went out to the mines and just poked
around and played, you know, like kids will do. Did
the Mexican families come to Rockdale that often?
Or was there an interchange of the two areas? I kind
of have an idea. No, the Mexicans came to Rockdale
and traded. about like the farmers came to
Rockdale and traded back in the old days. They came
in wagons and traded on Saturday. That's about the
only day farmers came to town in those days. Now you
notice with highways and automobile, farmers
come to town and trade every day, but At that time,
I'm pretty sure that those Mexicans, they came to
town once or twice a week, and you know, when they
bought groceries, they stocked up on them. They
put it in the big supply from the old-time grocery
stores before they had the cash and carry, you
know. And of course, they did an awful lot of their
buying. Their needs, they bought from the
commissaries or the company store. Could you sort
of sum up in general terms what the attitude of
Rockdale was toward the mines themselves and the
Mexicans? Well, I think the attitude of the
Rockdale people towards the mines and the Mexican
people was good. We were proud of having the mines
out there. It meant quite a bit to the town. You can
tell that from reading your paper. And as far as the
Mexicans were concerned, no, they were just some
old people out there working in the mines. And we
enjoyed a good relationship with them, and they
did with us.
Yes, I don't see the... Civil rights and human
rights hadn't been heard of then. Right. Yeah, I
don't see the conflict... between the Mexicans
and the Anglos that you do between the blacks and
the Anglos earlier on. Yeah, that's right. And
even the Anglos and the whites and the
American-Americans or the Chicanos, which
somebody said a term had just been invented the
last ten years. All right, I have a feeling it's the
few Spanish people, the young people that have
gone to college and picked up that term because I
found that the... Other people around here don't
use that term. They use Latin, or they use Spanish,
or they use Mexican, which has been educating to
me. But actually, as I remember the minds out
there, they were just, I'm not just exactly sure
that Rockdale citizens thought about them as
being an industry. They were proud of them. They
meant good business for the town, and they were
good for the town, but they don't think of them as
being an industry like we think of Alcoa as being
the industry now, or in that fact. Can you give any
reason for that? Well, if they were just so, they
were just so established, they'd been there, and
you know, it just, I mean, they were just there, and
that was it. And they just sort of faded away. And it
wasn't until the years after that that small towns
became conscious of industry and trying to get
industries into the small towns.
In those earlier days,
that just wasn't too big a thing. And I think the
people of Rockville took the mines kind of
matter-of-factly. That's the attitude I've been
getting. I think that's right. We were proud of
them. And they were under control of the Texas
Bureau of Mines. And a man named Bruce Gentry, who
lived here in Rockdale, was the chairman of the
Texas Bureau of Mines all his life, I guess. Well,
Indian Bullock came in. And then Bullitt came in
after him. After him, right. And E.A. Camp was also
a member of the board. He was a member of the board.
Right, so all three of those men were from
Rockville. The mines had a fairly decent accident
record. It was below the average in the United
States. They really did. I can remember that one
big cave-in after that rainy season, and I can
remember that later, a few years later, of some
coal burning under the ground out that side. You
could see for a period of several months, you could
see smoke coming up just out of the ground over a
long area south of the railroad track out there,
but it eventually just smothered itself out, and
they did have a low accident rate. especially
considering how crude the equipment was in those
days as compared to what, gee, if somebody would
start putting in a shaft mine out there in that area
now, it'd be a big deal. It'd be a much different
technique. Oh, yeah. Well, Mr. Cook, were you
familiar with any of the, I don't know what word to
use, intrapreneurs or capitalists that
randomize, like Sharp or E.B. Phillips? I knew,
yes, I knew all those men. They were all
businessmen in Rockdale. And Henry Meyer, H.C.
Meyer, was the mayor of Rockdale for years and
years and years, and a big, you know, a big Rockdale
booster. And E.B. Phillips was connected with the
same hardware firm that Mr. Meyer was, the old
Henny and Meyer store here. He was also the funeral
director. And the funeral director. He was in
charge of that department of the hardware,
furniture, and funeral directing. It was a big
story. It was the Henney and Meyer firm. They also
had the same sort of a business in New Braunfels,
and Henney, H-E-N-N-E, was in New Braunfels then.
Oh, I didn't know that. And Meyer lived up here,
uh-huh. And they had the same kind of an operation
in your Broncos back in those days. Well,
generally, you know, talking about the men that
owned the mines and ran the mines, were they local
people? Or were the mines run by outside capital?
No, I think most of those particular mines out
there were all local. And there was a Sparks.
Right. Do you remember anything about Dr. Sparks?
I just, not really. I just remember him, and I
remember the family, and remember, you know,
but that was before I got big enough to be
interested in how businesses and mine were run.
One thing I noticed that was kind of odd was that the
Mexican people have two basic celebrations at
least each year, Cinco de Mayo and the 16th of
September. Cinco de Mayo was the big one. Was it? Do
you remember any of those? Did you go to any of them?
I don't think I ever went to one, but I heard an awful
lot about them. And there was publicity in the
newspapers about them. And the Mexicans like to
celebrate. the 5th of May. That was a big day for
them. Do you know, did it affect Rockdale at all?
Did they come in to buy supplies? I imagine it
probably did. I don't know, but I expect it
affected business to a certain extent prior to the
celebration. They had to get ready for it. But
mostly they kept pretty much to themselves and
their celebrations were They were out there among
themselves. Well, I noticed, looking over 37
years in your newspaper, the last couple weeks,
that July 4th has always been a big celebration.
Big celebration here, out at Fair Park. Would the
miners and their families come in for that
celebration? Well, now that, I imagine, started
after the mining days. Yeah, after the mines
closed down. Remembering that the mines closed
down in the early to mid-20s, do you know what the
miners and their families did after they shut
down? No, I don't. No, I don't. But the shutdowns
out there were gradual, you know. One mine, then
later on another mine. And it wasn't just like an
industry closing up and leaving town. I see. So it
was throughout the 20s. Yeah, right. Were you
familiar with any of the physicians that worked
out of the mines at all? Were any of them your
friends? I probably knew most of those physicians
at that time. There were three, Dr. Wallace, Dr.
Sessions, Dr. Coulter. I expect they were all here
at that time. But did they ever talk to you about
having to go out there? No, no. That's been one hole
in the in the story so far. No, I never did but I'm
sure they did and they traveled in horse and buggy
at that time. Of course I guess by the 20s they had
their own cars. I imagine, yeah. So when was the
model he invented? Okay, so you're asking a
historian a question he should be able to answer.
No, I don't even know that myself.
Some of those early 1920 papers, I believe. Oh,
well, it was before then. I think the first one came
to Rockdale about 1915, maybe a little earlier.
Probably so. And some of the miners themselves had
them in the 20s. They were able to save up enough
money to purchase them.
But
you would say that after the mines were shut down
that the Mexicans would come in for the July 4th
celebrations? I'm sure they did. I noticed you had
county fairs quite often. The county fair in
Rockdale way back in the early days was an enormous
a celebration. They had big fairs on there at that
time, which was before the July 4th celebration.
Actually, the July 4th celebration probably came
into being after World War I, and most of them were
sponsored by the American Legion. And every year
they got just a little bit bigger. But prior to
that, quite a few years prior to that, was when the
old Rockdale Fair was in all its glory. The streets
weren't paved here, they were dirt streets. And
they had parades with floats, you know, on wagons
drawn by teams of horses and mules. I remember
reading descriptions of that. Yeah, and they were
big events, I tell you. Daredevil airplane
riders. I remember that. I remember when one
crashed out there when I was a kid. Yeah, they were
quite disappointed when that happened.
They didn't get to see the air show. Right. They
were more concerned about that than they were.
than he was a pilot of that plane, I think, although
I don't believe he was hurt critically. No, but he
did refuse to go back up again. He enjoyed about as
much of that as he could stand for the day, I think.
What do you think, do you think Lignite is finally
going to make a bigger impact on Rockville? Oh yes,
no doubt about that. What would you attribute that
to? Well, every year now, the demand for energy has
been showing up more and more, and lignite's
becoming more and more prominent now. And Alcoa
has been generating their own electricity out
there with lignite fuel ever since 1952. And
that's because lignite was out there is the reason
Alcoa is here. And there right now, building this
addition to the power plant, which was more than
double its size. And that will...
They've got a three-unit power plant they built in
1952. I remember writing publicity about that at
the time, and we had pictures of it, and they said it
was large enough to furnish It confers enough
power for six cities the size of Austin at the time
it was put into production out there. Well, since
then, Austin has grown quite some. And also, the
aluminum smelter has more than doubled in its
production and size. And the demand for
electricity and power has just gone up and up and
up. Of course, out there they used a strip mining
technique, whereas the early lignite mining was
shaft. Yeah, that's the early lignite mining was
shaft mining. Well, I'm wondering what the
economic difference is. I mean, back in the early
days, you did have Mexicans coming into town to buy
clothes and nothing else. So you did have, you
know, money coming in. Right, but that was the
number of Mexicans working in the mines. was just
insignificant as compared to the number of people
working out here, even just in the mines, in the
strip mining. There's more people working in the
strip mine now than there were? Yeah. It's a far
bigger operation than all the old shaft mines put
together. I see. So technology came in with the big
strip mining shovels, but it also brought more
jobs.
And with the addition of this power plant now,
they're increasing. TP&L and Alcoa are building
this new power unit as a cooperative venture.
They're both involved in it. And of course Shell is
here too. Yeah, but of course they're a separate
identity. They're on their own. They're coming in
and making plans to start a new strip mine
operation. And they don't know just what they're
going to do with that lignite that they mined yet,
but they're hoping to find what they call a mine
mouth customer. And I think that will mean quite a
bit to this area. Well, do you think the nature of
Rockvale is going to change with Alcoa expanding
and Shell coming in here? We will remain pretty
much the same. We'll grow. I think we're in for some
real growth. I think I don't believe the future
ever looked any better for Rockdale and does right
now. Well, do you think you'll lose some of the
rural town flavor? I noticed the other day at 5
o'clock it took me two or three lights to get
through. And I just had the feeling that that was an
unusual... thing at least 10 or 20 years ago. Oh
yeah, there weren't any traffic lights in those
days, but the streets were terrible. So with the
bad you get the good. Yeah, that's right. Because
Rockdale will grow and I think our business
district will grow. When Alcor came in in 1951,
from that time until now, When they came in, our
population was just a little over 2,000. And now
it's, I would guess, a conservative estimate
would be between 6,000 and 7,000. But our business
district hasn't grown in proportion to the
population. I think with the new development in
the next six or eight, ten years now, there will be
more business growth. You said Brown and Root is
also in the area now? Well, they're building,
they've got the contract to build that fire plant
for TPNL and Alcoa. I see. First of all, they'll
come in and then they'll leave, right? Yeah,
right. Their target date for completion of that
plant is 1981. So they'll be here until. Well, what
kind of a shock will that be to Rockville once they
leave? When the Alcoa construction was over in
1951, we went through pretty much the same thing,
you know. A big industry hit a small town all of a
sudden, and the impact was terrific. And, you
know, we had hundreds and hundreds of
construction workers in here for several years.
We'd have several, I think, construction workers
on this brown roof project. will peak at about 500
but as the plant gets into operation the mining
activities will increase and there'll be more
employment there to take up some of that slack and
about that same time Shell has plans for starting
its strip mining operations which which will just
be getting started when when this quits so for
another period of another three to five years they
will There'll be some construction activity
followed by new industrial and mining activity.
That's the way it looks to me right now. Well, if we
jump back in history just a little bit, I'm trying
to see if there are any parallels. Maybe there is,
maybe there isn't. And I realize that you would
have only been about eight years old, or even
younger. Between 1910 and 1920, for instance,
generally in Texas there was a great migration of
Mexican workers to Texas because of the
Revolution. Do you remember any sort of impact
that had on Rockdale? Not really, no. No, I really
don't. Because from all the time we had a lot of
Mexicans working in the mining area out there. And
I suspect that after the mines closed and the
Americans, I think just like the old fellow
Morales you're talking about, he moved to town. So
most of them, when the mines shut down, they did
move? And a lot of them, I think, moved in town and
got jobs, or they went out on a farm and farmed, or
maybe they left somewhere
else. But they were just kind of absorbed in the
flow, the ebb and flow. There wasn't any pressure
then on Rockdale's charity organizations to take
care of them? No, no. That's unusual. Well, it
would be today. In those days, it wasn't. Well, one
thing I've noticed, Mr. Cook, is that Up north,
they had company town situations, you know, the
old Coleman car company town. And the situation
here in Rockdale seems much more progressive than
that town. I mean, here in Rockdale, they paid
cash. The Mexicans could move around from mine to
mine. And up north, they were paid in company
script. They could not go into town to buy other
things. Do you have any idea why people like Sharp
and Sessions and Phillips developed a system like
that? No, I don't. I think, I don't, I have an idea
that it wasn't done intentionally. I think it
just, I think it just happened. I think it's just
one of those things that happened. Well, I wonder
if Mr. Vogel, you know, Herman Vogel had anything
to do with that. Well, he had, he bound to have had
something to... to do with it, but he was one of the
mine owners.
That's something I'd like to be able to explain,
you know, why it was a much more free-flowing, more
progressive situation. Well, I really hadn't
thought about it.
I can see what you mean.
Well, the fascinating thing is, as we said
earlier, it was a peripheral sort of industry. And
Rockdale is agriculturally oriented more. It was
then more than it is now. There's very little
agriculture there now. But you know, those mines,
those Mexicans came in here gradually as the mines
opened up. It wasn't like a big industry setting
down like Alco did in 51. A mine opened here. A year
or two later, a mine opened there. It was a gradual
process, and then they closed the same way. And
there wasn't any big influx or big outgo of that
Mexican population at any time, I don't believe.
But it was, do you think it was fairly fluid? I mean,
you know, new people came in, and the people that
were here left, or was it a sort of an internal
growth, sort of? I think it was more of a kind of an
internal growth than a family affair growth. You
know, like the fellow Morales, he worked in the
mines as a youth. His father worked in the mines, I
feel sure, maybe his grandfather. and you know
they they grew up these American miners their
families grew the boys grew into the mine.
Well I sure didn't want to thank you for your time
can you think of anything else? I really no I really
can't I wish I could. If you happen to run into you
know an answer or a personal answer to why the
Rockdale Ignite mine situation was more
progressive you know I'd appreciate Well,
I'll tell you one possible reason.